WHAT AN IDEAL CULTURE WOULD BE LIKE
    Prioritization of sound reasoning and evidence above all as the most important value
    Reproduction and Civilization are core values, ways of fulfilling an absurdist-like existence
    Explicit Anti-Religious Ignostic Atheism
    Complete Rejection of the Supernatural
    Prioritization of advancing understanding why the universe exists and how it works
    Georgist
    Negative Rights (for the most part)
    Entomo-Vegetarianism?
    Environmentalism and Environmental Awareness
    Multi-lingual
    Open Source Software Only
    Co-Operatives, few corporate hierarchies (if any)
    High Internet Usage and Access
    Limited Use of Roads only when necessary
    Technologically-Advanced and Technically-Savvy
    Believes in no unreasonable superstitions.
    It may celebrate holidays or designate days to show celebration or admiration for someone or something, as long as it doesn't entail such things like teaching Santa Claus as being real, leprechauns are real, etc.
    Reasonable and Satisfying Freedoms
    Hedonism if and only if there is no reducible suffering present and it is completely understood how the universe works.
    Values equality and shuns unreasonable discrimination.
    Embraces The Value Of Work, Productivity, And The Creation Of Wealth.
    Democracy is used when it is appropriate, and as part of the legal system if that works successfully and is appropriate
    As few social obligations as it is reasonably possible.

EXAMPLES HOW SOME CULTURES ARE WORSE/BETTER THAN OTHERS
[The relationship between genetics, memes, cults, and culture]
Although often unfairly discriminated against, the Romani people are one of the worst cultures in world. They have a culture of theft, property damage, crime, etc.

CASES WHERE IT IS THE MAJORITY THAT RIGHTFULLY OR METAPHYSICALLY DETERMINES WHAT HAPPENS? (WHEN DEMOCRATIC SOLUTIONS ARE PRACTICAL)
Languages: It is the communities who decide their languages, not languages that decide how the community speaks. Not only does this idea apply to areas of debate over “correct” grammar or pronunciation, but it also applies to all of the systems in our community as a whole. The systems are for the people and decided by the people, not vice versa.
Free Markets: i
i
i
