DEBATE WITH SOMEONE ON REASON SYSTEMS AND DEMOCRACY
> What is rational is determined by what people determine to be rational.
**Appeal to the People Fallacy.** What is reasonable is independent of what people *think* is reasonable. Even if a society *thinks* that slavery or the Holocaust is reasonable, that does NOT make those practices reasonable. Ergo, what you've just said is demonstrably false and contradictory.
This is exactly why determining the rules of society should be delegated to a court system capable of superior reasoning. One where all the reasoners and the judges are dedicated to figuring out the best system.
> Ergo, you cannot have a rational court system without democratic accountability.
What do you mean by "democratic accountability"? And I've already established this, but what is reasonable is independent of what a majority of people believe. To say otherwise is an Appeal to the People Fallacy.
> So does non-democracy????
If by non-democracy you mean a dictatorship, a monarchy, an oligarchy, etc, then yes, those systems would be managed by people with conflicts of interest in how the society should be structured and managed. But none of those are the kind of reasonable, anti-democratic society we're interested in.
> Not to mention, what do you even mean by conflict of interest? Give an example.
In a court system, the court selects the best, least biased people available from a larger pool of people to serve on the jury. If someone in the pool has had experiences or biases that could deter them from using their best judgement, then they are removed from the selection in favor of less biased people instead.
This paragraph is a bit off-topic towards your question, but it needs to be said for the context. How the court system would work when making the laws would certainly be more complex than deciding if someone broke the law or not because the former would be a multi-sided debate whereas the latter would be a two-sided debate that can usually be boiled down to a yes/no question. That being said, there are hundreds, possibly thousands of different issues and intricacies that would have to be addressed. Each decision would probably work similar to a regular court system where the best jurors are picked from a larger group of people (Except that in this case the pool of people would be strictly limited to professional, experienced people who have passed the necessary requirements and certification to prove that they are capable of exceptional reasoning skills.).
Back to conflicts of interest. Since there are hundreds to thousands of different decisions the court system would have to make, each decision would be made by selecting the best judges from a pool of professional reasoners. Likewise, one criterion for selecting the judges would be that they don't have any special interests that could conflict with selecting the best decision, just like a standard court system.
An example Conflict of Interest would be how homeowners in big cities would want to pass zoning laws to artificially decrease the supply of housing and thus increase the value of their property. The logic of pro-democracy supporters would be that homeowners should have a stake in deciding urban planning just because they live in the city, but this is not reasonable because they have a conflicting interest to limit the supply of housing to increase their property value. Even though the homeowners may in fact live in the city, it should be deemed inappropriate for them to have a stake in deciding the urban planning of that city should be since they have a conflicting interest to increase their property values at the cost of anybody wanting affordable housing.
Another example Conflict of Interest would be how college students might want taxpayers to pay for their college tuition. In this scenario, neither college students nor taxpayers should be chosen to decide if this should happen. The college students have the incentive to not pay for college at the cost of the taxpayers' wallets, while the taxpayer have the incentive to keep their money and avoid granting free college to the college students. And yet, pro-democracy supporters willingly encourage both sides to vote against each other. The entire process is comparable to sheep and wolves deciding what to have for dinner. A more objective, non-partisan thing to do would be to have judges who don't have anything to win or lose make the decision. They would consider all the pros and cons, list the potential side-effects, the economics behind it, possible alternatives, and they would make a decision that is consistent with reasonable ethics (which they would have determined before moving on to political philosophy since political philosophy is a branch of applied ethics).
You seem to think that it's possible to achieve a perfect, objectively good society. If that's the case, then why should we beat around the bush and wait years, decades, or even centuries for a majority of society to realize what the best political philosophy is when we could ignore their fallacious reasoning and implement the best system right now?

CONTINUED...
> No it isn't.

Yes it is.

> Reason is something explicitly invented and created BY PEOPLE.

Wrong. Humans never invented reason. Evolution did. You should also know that other mammals like orangutans, elephants, and dolphins are also capable of reasoning (but obviously not on the same level that humans can).

> It does not make those practices reasonable TO YOU, as an individual.

It shouldn't make those practices reasonable TO ANYBODY.

> Fortunately, you do not decide what is reasonable for all people, because that would be tyranny.

That is NOT what I am advocating for. Stop putting words in my mouth. I am suggesting that a group of people capable of superior reasoning make the decisions of society since they would be capable of creating the most reasonably society that could possibly exist. I never ever said that I specifically want to be the one to determine how a society runs.

> And no, I am not advocating for slavery, neither are most.

Maybe you aren't, but your inherently fallacious democracy would allow it if a majority of society agreed to it. You should also know that in the 1860 US Presidential Election, Stephen A. Douglas argued that slavery is justified if there is democratic support for it.

> Capable of superior reason ACCORDING TO WHO? You, right? Fuck that.

No, you just aren't using reason. There are objective standards to determine if someone is capable of superior sound reasoning.

> You don't yet to singlehandedly determine and define what is reasonable. People do that, in general.

Correct. And if people who have great reasoning skills heard about this innovative system, they would decide that it is likely the most reasonable way to determine the rules of a society.

Wouldn't you agree that people familiar with the following are objectively better at reasoning than someone who doesn't know them?:

- Knowing how to identify formal fallacies (Affirming the Consequent, Denying the Antecedant, Circular Reasoning, etc.).

- Knowing how to identify informal fallacies (Appeal to Nature, Texas Sharpshooter, Fallacy of Composition/Division, Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc, Slippery Slope, Red Herring, False Equivocation, etc.).

- Knowledge of cognitive biases, and how to acknowledge and avoid them.

- Understanding the reasoning process (sense perception, concept formation, stating premises, logic), and how it can go wrong.

- Understanding formal logic, propositional logic, modal logic, predicate logic, inductive logic, deductive logic, etc.

- Understanding the importance of evidence and the levels of certainty.
  
- Understanding that all knowledge is contextual and the limits of knowledge.

- Understanding and Application of a rational philosophy and understanding of reality / the world works.

- Questioning everything, including the foundation and underlying assumptions of one's own knowledge.

- Being able to detect and identify bias, acknowledge multiple perspectives, and think without biases.

- Knowing how to form correct conclusions, valid arguments, and sound arguments.

- Knowing how to observe, interpret, analyze, infer, evaluate, and explain.

- Knowing how to do high-quality research.

- Et Cetera

Clearly, there are without question, dozens of different critical thinking skills that one can learn to improve their ability to reason. You would have to be incredibly stupid to believe that someone who knows all of these great skills and great knowledge does NOT have superior reasoning over someone who doesn't know any of these.

Now of course, you can certainly make the valid argument that a democracy could be improved if the average voter learned all of these skills and applied them to their voting decisions, but the reality is that it is very very unlikely that you would ever be able to make every citizen in the society successfully learn and apply these skills. It's simply better and more efficient to have a pool of people who can do ALL of these skills, and to select the best ones for making a particular decision from that pool (the least biased ones would be selected just as a court system does when selecting a jury).

> Capable of superior reason ACCORDING TO WHO?

I already said this in the previous comment, but there would be a VERY rigorous assessment required for any judge if they choose to enter the pool of judges. And obviously, the assessment would test their ability to use all the critical thinking skills that I just listed down.

> You literally just found a fallacy on Google and decides it fitted your argument.

Bullshit. I wrote this down about over a year ago.

> My claim is that reason, as a concept, is a human creation, and as such, is inherently dependent on human perspective. A desperate man might consider theft of food to be reasonable. A comfortable man would not.

Correct, reason is dependent on the human perspective, and the best reasoning can only be done by humans.

That's why it's better to have multiple people debate a topic and decide the best decision instead of delegating that to only one person (which you keep falsely accusing me of wanting). When there are multiple people who have all the critical thinking skills mentioned above, and they are all debating against each other, they can see each other's cognitive biases, fallacies, false/assumed presmises, etc. and point these out to each other to eliminate them and collectively improve their power to reason. They can also share different perspectives with other, and if they are truly open-minded, they will admit when they have been wrong and choose the better decision instead.

> Not when you scale the democracy up. Other People, who are not homeowners, would not vote for that.

Also correct. Many of democracy's problems could be fixed by improving structure and functioning of the democracy, but the most pressing problem that can't be fixed is that democracy is an Appeal to the People Fallacy. That's why it has made literally thousands of bad decisions (allowing slavery, internment camps, entering the indochina war, entering the iraq war, prohibiting gay marriage, etc.), and why it will stop making bad decisions for as long as it exists.

> Literally both of them should be chosen.

You use the word 'literally' too much.

> The people should be consulted regardless of their position. Everybody is biased, and it is impossible to remove bias with any human.

Correct. Everybody is bias, but that doesn't mean that it's not possible to reduce bias.

> Whereas your solution is to introduce a T.Rex to impose upon then both.

Ad Hominem Fallacy. So far you have failed to provide any valid arguments for why Democracy should not be replaced with a Reason System.

> I don't believe in the concept of objective good and I don't believe that a bunch of university faculty from political philosophy are the best people to decide upon issues that affect the people , and more than you'd prefer being told how to live every aspect of your life.

Not necessarily university faculty. Just honest, non-partisan people who are able to pass a rigorous assessment proving that they have all the known critical thinking skills that most voters don't have.

> People inherently rebel against authority, a simple glance at history will show this.

It's not authority. It's sound reasoning. Reason would NEVER conclude an authoritarian society because that would be unreasonable.

> Because even a utopia, when forced upon people, becomes a prison.

So you're saying that a utopia is only valid if people choose it. I've never really considered that to be honest, but if that is true, then I suppose every society could be considered a prison if there is always going to be someone who doesn't want it.

> Guidance is healthy, control is not.

Keep in mind that I absolutely don't want a single reason system to determine society for the whole world. I am arguing in favor of a world of city states, each of which would ideally be equipped with their own reason system. The purpose of this is so that everything is more manageable and also so that people can leave and migrate somewhere else if they wish.

Also, you still didn't explain why it's reasonable for a society to use *both* a democracy AND a court system even though they clearly have very different standards for making decisions.

CONTINUED...
i
